as the bears move up the coast
snow cam gets ready for action but the
first bear it finds
is an inquisitive young male
[Music]
like so many bears he finds the spy cams
intriguing
[Music]
he subjects it to a pressure test using
a technique that works well on
[Applause]
[Music]
it's march and light returns to the high
arctic
sweeping away four months of darkness
[Music]
a polar bear stirs she has been
in her den the whole winter her
emergence
marks the beginning of spring
after months of confinement underground
she toboggans down
the slope perhaps to clean her fur
perhaps for sheer joy
[Music]
her cubs gaze out of their bright new
world
for the very first time
the female calls them but this steep
slope is not the easiest place
to take your first steps
[Music]
but they are hungry and eager to reach
their mother
who's delayed feeding them on this
special day
now she lures them with the promise of
milk the only food the cubs have known
since they were born
deaf and blind beneath the snow some two
months ago
[Music]
their mother has not eaten for five
months
and has lost half her body weight
now she converts the last of her fat
reserves into milk
for her cubs
[Music]
the spring sun brings warmth but also
a problem for the mother it starts to
melt
the sea ice that is where she hunts for
the seals she needs
to feed her cubs and she must get there
before the ice breaks up
[Music]
for now though it's still minus 30
degrees
and the cubs must have the shelter of
the den
[Music]
i'm really hoping lyra and mickey will
have returned
and we're in luck
our family is back but lyra's behavior
is different
it's interesting she's coming towards us
hey she goes
okay lyra is
getting a little bit closer this is when
i start getting nervous
just a bit
okay lyra i can see that you're smelling
there and i'm just
a little bit worried that it's the smell
that's coming from me that's holding
your attention
this is not a bear that is at all scared
it's a bear that's figuring out
what's going on whether there is an
opportunity to feed here
we're completely downwind so mick is
getting quite a good scent of us here
lyra has always actually moved away from
us and kept a personal distance and
right at the moment it's the first time
in the last year of being with her that
she's actually turned around and come
towards us and her
it's her body movement and her stance
that worries me a little bit when she's
tense she basically puts a
front paws forward and builds up a
stance it's like a spring ready to take
off you know
when they come at you they their initial
speed is incredibly fast
this is the first time i felt threatened
by lyra
if she comes you drop everything you
drop the monitor you drop the camera
[Music]
jason is he safe there
just grab one more shot of lyra i don't
like it
okay should we move back then for sure
if you don't like it i'd rather move
back now
please golden okay
right lighter that's close enough for
now
despite the fact that she hasn't been
aggressive towards us at all
there may well come a point where she
views me differently that she sees me
and
thinks possibly this is something that i
can eat maybe this is my next meal
we may be safe but i'm so worried
about lyra and mickey while the bears
wait for the bay to freeze
there's little to do but sleep and play
giving visitors an intimate view of
polar bear life
no one appreciates this more than
scientist malcolm ramsey
in the summertime when we're working
it's at the time
the bears are just coming on shore and
we've caught
individual bears probably on the day
that they arrived ashore
in exactly the same spot but we've got
the same bear
in previous years the sea ice remember
is not solid so the bears are moving
over
a huge area the size of great britain
it's not a substrate that's constantly
moving
particularly in summer when they're
about to come ashore the ace is very
broken up
where the last passages of ice
are found can vary by
several hundred kilometers from one year
to the next and yet he can swim right
ashore
in his what is to us a featureless
environment
and know where they are
malcolm's been following these animals
for 20 years
they still surprise him every year i
find that the bears do something
quite extraordinary um and i'll think
why are they doing that where did that
come from what's what's going on there
i'll predict something will happen and
gosh they don't do that at all it's
something completely different
why would they do that so it's it's i
find it's
no end of excitement to work with an
animal in which
every year i feel i know less and less
about it rather i realize their lives
are much richer than i ever expected
[Music]
there's no doubt about it polar bears
are full of surprises
much of malcolm's efforts to understand
what it's like to be a polar bear
focus on how these animals survive in
such a hostile environment
they can walk out in conditions that to
us seem uh
most ferocious and to them is equivalent
to a
warm spring day we've seen bears jumping
into the water on
what it appeared to us to be a rather
chilly day and to them they just
um leap into to chill down or
to have fun swimming in the water
somewhere somehow there has to be a way
into this wall of blubber
there are pups in there
there's one
there's another one
another but how do you get the pop away
from the big ones
it seems to be more than one bear by
itself can match
but the bear isn't by itself other bears
have picked up the scent
[Music]
polar bears are more than just solitary
animals
[Music]
they actively dislike each other
but they're all very hungry now and
there's an awful lot of food cornered
here
[Music]
they're circling like vultures the only
trouble is
these bodies aren't dead even the mother
is here with her cup
the bears have backed the walruses into
the water but can they
organize an assault
so
oh
the mass attack uncoordinated as it is
seems to be working
the walruses are breaking ranks
the bears have singled out the young the
old and the unhealthy
especially the young
now they're closing in
there's the objective
[Music]
confusion among the walruses the wall of
blubber is breached
a pup goes
[Music]
another one but as soon as a kill is
made
the carcass is dragged away so that
other bears won't steal it
it's a victory and it's a massacre the
beach is covered with walrus meat and
bones
because there were so many bears they're
all
feasting at a time when they might be
expected to starve
there are even leftovers for later
rivals
[Music]
you